[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It seems to me what I've
been speaking to is the issue
of the use of psychedelics for
inner work, for spiritual work.
There are a couple of things
I should point out about that.
One is that a lot of the reason
we used psychedelics because
of the monolithic quality of the
belief systems of the culture
are no longer the way it is,
that relative reality, which
was awakened '50s and
'60s and came back in,
but there was a lot of stuff
that forced relative reality
as consciousness.
And that has mainstreamed
in the society.
I'll pick up a
hitchhiker, and I'll
realize that her consciousness
is just right where
mine is all the time.
And it thinks what
right have you
got to have this kind
of consciousness.
I drugged myself out of
my existence to get here
and meditated and went to India,
and you've got this thing.
And then I realized it's
like a lot of the stuff
that you took chemicals to
do from this point of view
of awakening out of a reality
when that was your motivation.
A lot of it is much
more accessible now.
And it's maybe overly
strong thing to say,
it's an anachronism, but it's
certainly not as critical.
The next fact is that we
know that set and setting
in chemical use is critical,
that the set of your mind
and the setting in
which you do your work
determines the nature
of the experience.
Psychedelics, particularly
the tryptamines,
override habits of thought.
But where you go with that
is where you go with that.
That has to do with your karma.
So at the moment
in this culture,
the setting is really a little
paranoid about drug use.
And therefore, it may not be
the best spiritual practice
around these days because
you don't have enough control
of all the variables.
I think you realize
methods are methods,
and some methods are
useful and some aren't
at any moment in history.
The next thing I would
say is that my experience
from the '60s and on
is that a lot of people
experimented or
used chemicals when
they didn't have a good
ground to come back into.
And there are two
places you can bad trip.
One's on the way out, and
one's on the way back.
You bad trip on the way
out because everything
starts to dissolve
including you,
and it's very disturbing
to some people.
As Tim said, I die
so hard each time.
The bad trip on the way back
is you've been out la la land,
and it's been beautiful and
one and exquisite and God
and spirit.
And you come back, and
you look in your bedroom
and in your life and
in your relationships,
and you don't want to come back.
That's the other bad trip.
Now the bad trip
going out with a guide
and with appropriate
preparation,
you needn't have that.
You can use that, and it'll
be a productive experience.
The bad trip coming
back is partly
if you have used the chemical
to escape this plane.
And if escape is
your motivation,
you really can
anticipate you're going
to have some trouble
along the way,
and you've got to keep
moving pretty fast.
How you don't get into an
escape thing is to get ground.
And so for young people
who are very busy
with new relationships, with
economics, with curriculum,
with career, with figuring
out how to play it,
often the ground isn't
really a stable one
from which to do this
kind of experimentation.
So my statement has always
been become somebody
before you try to
become nobody, that is,
don't try to up level when your
ego isn't developed because it
takes a certain
kind of ego strength
to do this kind of work, which
is interesting since it's
overriding ego.
I would say to each person get
as educated as much as you can
and make your own decisions.
I am very much opposed
to any legislation
about human consciousness.
I really think
individuals should
have a right to do with their
consciousness as they will.
I mean if I look at
drug use in inner city
and in the middle class, I
see that in the inner city,
the lack of economic and social
opportunity and all of that
and pushing against
something that's not giving
and the society where
you're being confronted
with television, with all
the possibilities, none
of which you can have, I can see
that drugs are used to escape.
And what I see in the middle
class where they can have stuff
is that a lot of the
middle class people
got what they thought the
American dream promised them,
at which point they
would feel a certain way,
and then they don't feel it.
They got the success.
They worked hard for
it, and they got it,
and it's not enough.
And then it's more
is better, and that
is the motivation for the
drug use at that point.
And the whole issue of
voluntary simplicity,
which only comes at a certain
level of human consciousness
where people begin to
move towards simplicity so
that there's enough for
everyone, those kind of thought
forms, those come out of a
certain level of evolution.
And part of the drug problem
is the escape mentality
in the society because there
are some deep-rooted lack
of satisfaction in the mythology
of this culture at this moment.
And within that whole
context is our opportunity
to get it all together and to
be present in that situation.